# Creating a Digital Strategy

## Characteristics

1. business vocabulary
2. intelligence community

3. HUMINT: human intelligence

4. OSINT: open-source intelligence

5. FI: Foreign Interference
6. FI: Foreign Intelligence: The Service's mandate.



## All of Government Strategies

#### UK Digital Strategy:

- foundations
- skills and talent
- digital growth: invest, stage, scale
- prosperity, level-up
- place in world

# Ideas

Create a survey.  Surveys are boring - use 18F methods to elicit and encourage collaboration.  Use methods from the RDS study.

Innovation incubator support (like 2017 innovation & skill plan)

# How to Create a Digital Strategy: 2015

See [2015 Canada Digital Research Infrastructure Strategy](https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/plans-reports/sites/default/files/attachments/DRI_Strategy_Consultation-eng.pdf) How To available on the [this page](https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/plans-reports/en/canadas-st-strategy/consultation-developing-digital-research-infrastructure-strategy).

Questions:

1. How can X be realistically transformed, strengthened and supported over the next five (5) years?
2. What are the biggest challenges limiting the effectives on the DRI (digital research infrastructure) ecosystem?
3. What opportunites are there to more efficiently deploy the human, technical and financial resources currently being devoted to DRI?
4. What do you see as the biggest challenges to effective data management and the development of data standards in Canada?   What could be done to promote more rigorous and coordinated data managements system that supports research excellence and maximizes the benefits generated by our investments?
5. What is the current capacity wihtin post-secondary insitutions to support research data curation?
6. What are the biggest strengths of the DRI ecosystem?   How will these strengths be affected and prioritized by a dransofmration of DRI in Canada?
7. What is the role of private sector in supporting a strong DRI ecosystem in Canada?
8. Do you have any other comments?

# Innovation

## 2017 : Innovation and Skills Plan

[2017 Canada Budget - The Innovation and Skills Plan](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2017/docs/plan/chap-01-en.html).  The main focus of the [2017 budget](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2017/docs/plan/chap-01-en.html) was:

- skills and innovation
- infrastructure 
- tax fairness 
- a strong Canada

### Skills

1. Youth: Help young Canadians get the skills and experience need to kick-start their careers
2. Continuous Learning: Make training opportunities more accessible to working Canadians
3. Diverse Learning Engagement: Increase the number of Canadians participating in work-integrated learning
4. Global Talent Pool: Improve access to global talent through accelerated processing times (immigration, VISA, ...)
5. STEM growth in 
6. Diverse Groups: Grow skillset in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics), coding and digital skills (especially in underrepresented groups)

### Research, Technology and Commercialization

Canadian governments and post-secondary institutions invest significantly in science, research and development.  Business community underinvests in these areas.   Impact: Canadian discovers exploited (commercialized, creating good paying jobs) in other countries.   Need to bridge commercialization gap.

- increase investment in innovation in six (6) key areas: advanced manufacturing, agri-food, clean technology, digital industries, health/bio-sciences, clean resources
- create businss-led innovation superclusts for innovattive industries
- increase collaborations between industry, post-secondary institutions and research institutions
- Reinforce research strenghts in quantum computing, stem cells and artificial intelligence (AI)
- Assist innovators in findg first customer to test & vlaidate their technologies through the federal government

### Program Simplification

Simplify the innovation program suite to be client-centric and ensure that programs the best support to Canadian innovators.

- review innovation programs and identify consolidation and simplification approach
- provide client-centric approach through digital application processes, quicker processing and assistance (response and focused on results)
-  measure:  bring a data focus to the impacts of federal support (understanding, driving and report impacts)

### Investment & Scale

Many small businesses and innovative startups in Canada.  Mindset is you must leave Canada to grow.   Must develop tools to help Canada attract investment and support growth.

grow goods and services exports 

double number of high-growth companies

create new, good, well paying jobs 

increase the late-venture capital for growing firms

help women entrepreneurs grow their business

provide a single, streamlined tool to attract and support business investments

## What success will look like

- most skilled, talented, creative and diverse workforce *in the world*
- more opportunities to get education, skills and work experience needed to participate fully in the workface
- businesses will be strong, growing and globally competitive; capable of being world-leaders in fields 
- leading edge of discovery and innovation; more ground-breaking research 
- leadership in AI (academic and research) will be translated to a more innovative economy, increased economic growth, and improved quality of life for Canadians

# Canada Budgets

| Year                                                         | Focus, Pillars                                               |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [2023](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2023/home-accueil-en.html) | Affordable Living, Public Health and Dental Care, Green Economy |
| [2022](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2022/home-accueil-en.html) | Housing, Climate, Jobs and Growth, Affordability             |
| [2019](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2019/home-accueil-en.html) | Middle Class, Good Jobs, Housing, Seniors, Pharmacare        |
| [Archived - Budget 2018 (canada.ca)](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2018/home-accueil-en.html) | Growth, Progress, Advancement, Reconciliation.  Advancement: Environment, Clean Economy, Global Gender Equality, Protecting Vulnerable Women and Girls.  Progress ( research, grants, big data, infrastructure).  Growth (new workers benefit, child benefit, indigenous benefits, gender wage gap, parental sharing benefit) |
| [2017](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2017/home-accueil-en.html) | Skills, Innovation, Infrastructure, Middle Class Jobs, Communities Built for Change  (smart cities, transit, clean air and water), Tax Fairness for Middle Class, Strong Canada |
| [2016](https://www.budget.canada.ca/2016/home-accueil-en.html) | Middle Class, Innovative and Clean Economy, Inclusive and Fair Canada, Global Canada, Open and Transparent |

[Digital Government — Senator Colin Deacon](https://www.colindeacon.ca/projects/digital-government)

Digital Government: 

- a new frontier in value creation for individuals and institutions around the world
- Canada faces unique challenges.  Geographically large and diverse country with two official languages and multiple orders of government to navigate

# Ukraine Dila

Senator Deacon's statement on [Digitalization of Government Services](https://sencanada.ca/en/senators/deacon-colin/interventions/588750/9#hID).  

- Dila = Action in English
- **Wide Team** (need better wording to summarize): Success in digitization is possible when "policy, practice and partnership efforts are synchronized"
- **Urgency & Pressure**: I believe that their success rests on the recognition that government is a monopoly and the lack of competition removes pressure to innovate. To counter this fact, President Zelenskyy’s government has consistently displayed strong political leadership and commitment in support of Diia. They’ve also recognized that the risk of inaction is far greater than any other risk.
- Canada decline:  UN reports on e-government, Canada has decline over last 10 years (was 11<sup>th</sup> now 37<sup>th</sup>).  Leaders are Denmark, Republic of Korea and Estonia.

[Ukraine, IdentityNorth, Dila Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ct98qoZAr2U&ab_channel=IdentityNORTH) (1 hour) Slava Banik

- IdentiyNorth rebranded [Exite](https://www.excitesummit.com/): EXCITE is Canada’s premier community of digital economy leaders, technology experts, policymakers, and innovators, focused on advancing digital trust and catalysing digital solutions that make life and business better for Canadians.  Digital Solutions, Digital Trust & Security, People & Innovation.
- [**EXCITE**'s 2023 Fall Summit](https://www.tickettailor.com/events/excite/969093#): November 8 and 9 - Ottawa - Bayview Yards.  Themes: Service Delivery Models, Cybersecurity and Data Protection, Digital Talent and Innovation.   **$500.**
- 2020 IdentityNorth ([Financial Post](https://financialpost.com/pmn/press-releases-pmn/business-wire-news-releases-pmn/canadian-and-quebec-ministers-for-digital-government-global-indigenous-data-experts-health-networks-privacy-experts-and-more-speaking-at-identitynorth-june-17-and-18)): digital identity, privacy, data ethics discussing ideas, technologies, challenges and innovations.  Digital economy, driving digital transformation.
- [Slava Bank - CISSC Special Members](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2t6WrYyt5I&ab_channel=CIOStrategyCouncil): Focus on mobile as it is more popular.  Web portal is less useful
  - [Taxes](https://youtu.be/I2t6WrYyt5I?t=789): You don't fill anything.

User-centric, we have to be convenient for the public.

Problem: Not strong in IT, different systems not connected, ... **Dila**

Digital Services: develop entity systems, registries, make them transparent.

- Super-App: most applications have one feature (taxi, social media, ..).  Lots of different apps is complex.
- digital signature
- 13-apps fully legislated applications in the application.  Web Portal (25 applicatsion).  Ukraina has about 120 public services.
- launched in 2020, in 2023 have 70% of adults using application.
- for young and early adopters are onboard
- age group after 55 is about 25% of audience
- a solution for everyone, make convenient and relevant
- features: digital documents in mobile application, we authentic user in mobile, when we are sure, we make request to registry (driver, vehicle, citizen, id registry).  Person receives document on application.  Registries already exist.  Task was build connection to the registries.  Now people have own documents on their smart phone.  ID card.   
- Can use for domestic services.  For international travel, it is a biological record. Student ID, Pension ID
- User Experience: When you change, digitizing documents and services the point is to stop trying to reduce experience of the online document.  Do not make it like a physical one.  The orientation (portrait, landscape) is not practical.  Solve the task to create another interface for the documents, give them new life.
- Change: Digital documents, must cover question focus of documents, banks, insurance, hospitals where copiers are request; screen shot, ...: then we understood it made no sense, we have registry and digital signature.  We do not have to make it look like the physical document.
- Focus on digital document.  Just remember create something new, and not adopt something old style.
- Do not focus on of a person's digital document.  Imagine the person's life, somewhere in life, on the road, at a bank, to use the train, family travel with need of kids documents.  Spend some time to make a list of life situations.   Cover the implementation stages, in both private or public sector.
- Economic Growth: Helps business to grow fast.  Ukraine has modern banking.  You can open a bank account.    Integrations with all banking systems in Ukraine.  They can request sharing of the documents.  90-seconds to open a bank account 7 days a week, 24 hours a day.
- Legislation:  Secret to success to implement digital documents is legislation.  Digital documents is an option, but mandatory for the companies.  Any citizen can download digital documents and use at any state entity or company.  
- Partners: Deliver systems, all banks, most hospitals, all administrated centres, real estate
- Public services should be convenient in mobile applications.  We have connections to the registries.
- Do not ask for information we already have in the registry.  You have to care, and work deeply on any service you have to make it more simple.  We do not use the descriptions of the original forms.  We re-write everything.
- Composable:  Local services, local IT systems, local registries.  Question is how to connect each and launch general services (provincial, federal).  All Ukraine is separated in communities, they can have their own registries.  Our goal was state level (we did not address local municipalities).  Exchange channel to exchange data exists.
- Change living address.   State registries, actual information of living is in local registry.  A question of integration.
- Automated: System checks information, there is no manual checks.  This is a huge optimization, saves money, reduces corruption, optimize IT support for portals.
- Dila is like the head of the train in digitization.  All entities must adopt this, to make it more secure, more available, more scalable for Ukraine population
- Data protection and safety.  Philosophy of application, is we do not have information of the people.  We do not collect information.  We have a secure, protected and encrypted connection.  If someone destroys our system, nothing can be taken from there.  
- Best experience from private sector on data protection, Cyber security and penetration tests.  They were not successful, used best practice like bug bounty, and invited hackers from all the world and noone found opporutnity to leak data.   Even during the war we are sure this is one of the most secure applications in the wrold
- Estonia, 20 years #1 in digitization.  Estonia came to Ukraine and they discovered, and decided Dila is the best solution.   One stop shop, digital signature, public service, simplicity, user experience, documents, user interface - best in world
- Estonia is adopting Dila to Estonia registries.

Colin Deacon, Aran Hamilton

- Nobody was asking for this.  We need political leadership on this. ([timestamp of video](https://youtu.be/Ct98qoZAr2U?t=1744)) Canadians choice is a more cumbersome, slower and more expensive access to public services.  Enabling legislation is as important as the technology and often more difficult.
- Ukraine offering to share the source code with Canada
- [Aran Hamilton - Thoughts](https://youtu.be/Ct98qoZAr2U?t=1799). The barriers are not the technology, that is not the problem.  We have great technologies in Canada, and we work with great partners across the globe.  We can solve these problems..  Political will is the big part of it.  There is a resistance to change, we have always done it this way.  Philosophy of overcoming resistance to change.  Setup the goal for how it should be; best practices versus past practices. 

  - Our joke in Ukraine, was to not fix the cows that have.  We took the best experience from the private sector (focused on user experience and simplicity, if we don't this, the private company will not survive).   One button to close a business in Ukraine. 
  - Dila has 3 **awards** for best experience, best interface.
 - What were some of the obstacles?  Banks likely unlike to change way of doing business.   Political will was the biggest reason for success. Zolensky 2019 - political will, launching in a smart phone, mobile application, why is it necessary to start with a document.  You already have the documents, it is a quick win.  Invited deputy minister of internal affairs, the listened to us about driver's license, and deputy minister but was not in same boat.  President focused on digitalization even in war, in two-weeks we returned to conversation, but on a better note.
 - Product Led Growth: You do not have do something with processes that already work.  None wanted to help us.  What changed?  The number of people who started logging in and using application.  Ukrainian people are proud of the application, and that is the best in the world.  1million users in 3-days.  Growing.  If people see others supporting, they start supporting.
   - HR ambassador network.
- We have deputies on digital transformation.  Minister of Internal Affairs have their own deputies.  This helps us make a huge jump together.
- Canada, ministries going their own way, and not aligning with federal government
- Minister of Digital Transformation: The whole economy, is in cabinet, at senior level, following the directions of the leader of the country.  Action-oriented minister leading way.  Best practice over legacy practice as a key rule.
  - Canada builds around legacy tech  (like BRS, COMS, ..).  Versus retiring legacy tech.  Fundamentally different
  - Speed, attraction, iterate and add.  Private level sector success.  And you do that by user-experience ([Deacon timestamp](https://youtu.be/Ct98qoZAr2U?t=2261))
  - **Thought DJN : Sense of Urgency required for transformation**
  - What is holding Canada back?  There is no excuses.  I don't get it.

Innovation:  **War drove innovation**.  People move abroad, isolated terrotories, people move.  Mobile application with documents, you can launch TV, radio, news on any territory anywhere they are.  During war, Dila was #1 opportunity to stay in touch with people.   Many people moved to western Ukraine.  Impossible to serve these people without Dila.

- Necessary to start with something.  Develop something better that you have already.  Iterate.  Move step by step.   Work on promotion, legislation, implementation phases.  

Aran - Rapid Fire Questions

- To senator deacon - how to deal with growing mistrust of government.   A: We have lots of challenges, privacy .  and competition law reform for the digital era. How big tech uses our data, against us sometimes.  Long term fight.  How do we rebuilt trust in government and media.  Essential, democracy dies in darkness
- Start small and iterate.  # refuges brought it, allow them have documents on the phone, and they will have better access.
- Dila - individuals have access and control of their data.  Digital Identity benefits for the citizen, versus the fear.  People want control of their own information.  Deliver it.  Deliver the value.
- Digital ID, payroll, for Afghans, irus scans, fingerprints.  Taliban controls systems and data used against the people.   What about risks of Russian invasion of Ukraine?  A: Ukrainian can receive Canadian driver license after showing Ukrainian drivers license.  Having a digital solution, is about digital literacy, too.  Not just the task to explain how it works (it was hard 3 years ago).  Now they are modern and have more questions on security.  Dila catalyzed interested in cyber protection.  You develop registries and IT systems.  You have to do the system transparently.  Constructions services, is the most corrupted area - built a house, ...  Make it transparent, all actions in registry is made by digital signature.  Impossible to do something bad with the registry and data.  
- Ukrainian receive notification if any official looks at your data.   If you do nothing, and someone looks at your data, property, land - you receive notification - ministry, name.   Provides insurance data is protected. 
- Launch of passports.  People scared of fake.  We made the exchanging data of Ukraine Bureau of Credit History - if any bank requests information about your credit history.  You get motivation, and you can block information.
