


Governance: Governance, derived from the Greek word kubernan (to steer) is an important responsibility of the architect role. As the name implies, the scope of architecture governance covers any aspect of the software development process that architects (including roles like enterprise architects) want to exert an influence upon. For example, ensuring software quality within an organization falls under the heading of architectural governance because it falls within the scope of architecture, and negligence can lead to disastrous quality problems. [Ref: Fundamentals of Software Architecture - OReilly]

Architecture:
- *Architecture is the decisions that you wish you could get right early in a project, product or project lifecycle* [Ralph Johnson & Martin Fowler]
- *Architecture is about the important sutff, whatever that is.* [Ralph Johnson & Martin Fowler]

Technical Debt:
- Technical Debt is a term was coined by Ward Cunningham; *"Shipping first-time code is like going into debt. A little debt speeds development so long as it is paid back promptly with a rewrite. Objects make the cost of this transaction tolerable. The danger occurs when the debt is not repaid. Every minute spent on not-quite-right code counts as interest on that debt. Entire engineering organizations can be brought to a stand-still under the debt load of an unconsolidated implementation, object-oriented or otherwise."* [Ward Cunningham - 1992].  Note, Ward Cunningham is one of the authors of the [Agile Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/)
- The sum of time and effort one has to pay to keep up with the tools one is 'married' to.
- Technical debt (also known as design debt or code debt, but can be also related to other technical endeavours) is a concept in software development that reflects the implied cost of additional rework caused by choosing an easy (limited) solution now instead of using a better approach that would take longer. [Technical Debt - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_debt).  As a change is started on a codebase, there is often the need to make other coordinated changes in other parts of the codebase or documentation. Changes required that are not completed are considered debt, and until paid, will incur interest on top of interest, making it cumbersome to build a project. Although the term is used in software development primarily, it can also be applied to other professions.
- Technical debt is a concept in programming that reflects the extra development work that arises when code that is easy to implement in the short run is used instead of applying the best overall solution.[Technical Debt - Technopedia](https://www.techopedia.com/definition/27913/technical-debt)
  - Technical debt is commonly associated with extreme programming, especially in the context of refactoring. That is, it implies that restructuring existing code (refactoring) is required as part of the development process. Under this line of thinking refactoring is not only a result of poorly written code, but is also done based on an evolving understanding of a problem and the best way to solve that problem.
  - Technical debt may also be known as design debt.
- When taking short cuts and delivering code that is not quite right for the programming task of the moment, a development team incurs Technical Debt. This debt decreases productivity. This loss of productivity is the interest of the Technical Debt.[Technical Debt Metaphor - Agile Alliance](https://www.agilealliance.org/introduction-to-the-technical-debt-concept)
